WASHINGTON — President-elect Donald J. Trump said on Sunday that he had fallen short in the popular vote in the general election only because millions of people had voted illegally, leveling the baseless claim as part of a daylong storm of Twitter posts voicing anger about a three-state recount push.
“In addition to winning the Electoral College in a landslide, I won the popular vote if you deduct the millions of people who voted illegally,” Mr. Trump wrote Sunday afternoon.
The series of posts came one day after Hillary Clinton’s campaign said it would participate in a recount effort being undertaken in Wisconsin, and potentially in similar pushes in Michigan and Pennsylvania, by Jill Stein, who was the Green Party candidate. Mr. Trump’s statements revived claims he made during the campaign, as polls suggested he was losing to Mrs. Clinton, about a rigged and corrupt system.
The Twitter outburst also came as Mr. Trump is laboring to fill crucial positions in his cabinet, with his advisers enmeshed in a rift over whom he should select as secretary of state. On Sunday morning, Kellyanne Conway, a top adviser, extended a public campaign to undermine one contender, Mitt Romney — a remarkable display by a member of a president-elect’s team. In television appearances, she accused Mr. Romney of having gone “out of his way to hurt” Mr. Trump during the Republican primary contests.
Claims of wide-scale voter fraud have been advanced for years by Republicans, though virtually no evidence of such improprieties has been discovered — especially on the scale of “millions” that Mr. Trump claimed.
Late on Sunday, again without providing evidence, he referred in a Twitter post to “serious voter fraud in Virginia, New Hampshire and California.”
A day earlier, Mr. Trump’s transition team ridiculed the idea that recounts were needed. “This is a scam by the Green Party for an election that has already been conceded,” it said in a statement, “and the results of this election should be respected instead of being challenged and abused.”
That message runs counter to the one Mr. Trump sent on Sunday with his fraud claims — if millions of people voted illegally, presumably officials across the country would want to pursue large-scale ballot recounts and fraud investigations.
But the Twitter posts could energize some of his supporters, who have claimed online that Mrs. Clinton’s two million-vote lead in the popular vote has been faked. Mr. Trump at times promoted other conspiracy theories during the campaign, including claiming that Senator Ted Cruz’s father was somehow tied to the assassination of President John F. Kennedy.
Many of Mrs. Clinton’s supporters have been galvanized by the notion that vote recounts in the three states — where Mr. Trump leads by a combined total of about 100,000 votes — could somehow overturn Mr. Trump’s commanding Electoral College victory. By announcing, three weeks after Mrs. Clinton conceded, that it would participate in the Wisconsin recount, her team has helped reignite the contentious atmosphere of the campaign, of which Mr. Trump’s Twitter barrages were a fixture. (By all accounts, Mr. Trump types out many, though not all, of his own Twitter posts.)
After spending almost five days in Palm Beach, Fla., where he celebrated Thanksgiving at his Mar-a-Lago resort, Mr. Trump made no public statements on Sunday other than those via Twitter. He returned in the afternoon to Trump Tower in Manhattan.
Through the day, Mr. Trump appeared fixated on the recount and his electoral performance. In a series of midafternoon Twitter posts, not long before he boarded his flight, Mr. Trump boasted that he could have easily won the “so-called popular vote” if he had campaigned only in “3 or 4” states, presumably populous ones.
“I would have won even more easily and convincingly (but smaller states are forgotten)!” he wrote.
Kellyanne Conway, a senior adviser to Mr. Trump, spoke to journalists at Trump Tower on Nov. 21. Credit Pool  by Aude Guerrucci
The afternoon messages followed a string of early-morning Twitter posts in which Mr. Trump railed against the recount efforts. In an initial post at 7:19, he wrote: “Hillary Clinton conceded the election when she called me just prior to the victory speech and after the results were in. Nothing will change.”
He went on to quote a comment by Mrs. Clinton during one of their debates, in which she said she was horrified by Mr. Trump’s refusal to say that he would accept the outcome of the election. And he noted that in her concession speech, she had urged people to respect the vote results.
“‘We have to accept the results and look to the future, Donald Trump is going to be our President,’” Mr. Trump wrote, quoting Mrs. Clinton.
One person who spoke with Mr. Trump over the holiday weekend said the president-elect had appeared to be preoccupied by suggestions that a recount might be started, even as his aides played down any concerns. Another friend said Mr. Trump felt crossed by Mrs. Clinton, who he believed had conceded the race and accepted the results.
In a post on Medium, Marc Elias, the Clinton team’s general counsel, said the campaign would participate in Ms. Stein’s recount effort with little expectation that it would change the result, partly out of a sense of duty to the millions who voted for Mrs. Clinton.
“We do so fully aware that the number of votes separating Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton in the closest of these states — Michigan — well exceeds the largest margin ever overcome in a recount,” Mr. Elias said, noting that Clinton campaign officials had found no “actionable evidence” of hacking or attempts to tamper with the vote.
Late Sunday night, Mr. Elias responded on Twitter to Mr. Trump’s allegations, writing, “We are getting attacked for participating in a recount that we didn’t ask for by the man who won election but thinks there was massive fraud.”
In Wisconsin, Mr. Trump leads by 22,177 votes. In Michigan, he has a lead of 10,704 votes, and in Pennsylvania, his advantage is 70,638 votes.
Mr. Trump’s aides echoed his concerns about the recount effort in appearances on Sunday morning television news programs. Ms. Conway, who was his campaign manager, said on NBC’s “Meet the Press” that Mrs. Clinton and her campaign advisers would have to decide “whether they’re going to be a bunch of crybabies.”
As for the debate over Mr. Romney, Ms. Conway, echoing comments she posted last week on Twitter, made clear that she opposed choosing Mr. Romney as secretary of state.
“There was the ‘Never Trump’ movement, and then there was Gov. Mitt Romney,” she said on ABC. During the primaries, Mr. Romney called Mr. Trump a “fraud” and a “phony.”
Ms. Conway said it was important for Mr. Trump to seek to unify the Republican Party by making gestures to those who opposed his candidacy. But, she added, “I don’t think the cost of party unity has to be the secretary of state position.”
Moments after appearing on the show, Ms. Conway, who is under consideration to be Mr. Trump’s press secretary, wrote on Twitter that she had told Mr. Trump her opinion privately, “and I’ll respect his decision.”
On “Meet the Press,” she said people felt “betrayed” by the idea that Mr. Romney could get a top cabinet job. “I’m not campaigning against anyone,” she said. “I’m just a concerned citizen.”
JERUSALEM — Within days of Donald J. Trump’s election to the presidency, Jerusalem’s city planning chief declared an end to the era of holding up new housing for Jewish residents in contentious neighborhoods out of deference to American objections.
Last week, he followed through, advancing a long-delayed plan to build 500 homes, a down payment on thousands more to come. The mayor’s office insisted that the timing was coincidental and the decision not political. But the planning chief made clear that he saw a green light to proceed “now that Trump” had won.
Call it the Trump Effect. Around the world, his election is already shaping events — or at least perceived to be shaping them — even though he will not take office for seven more weeks. Companies hoping to profit from Mr. Trump’s economic policies have seen shares soar. Countries fearing his anti-trade stance have seen the value of their currencies plunge against the dollar. Governments are recalibrating policies on trade, defense and immigration.
The behavior of the global markets toward Mr. Trump has been uneven. On Monday, stocks and the dollar slipped slightly and bond prices rose, perhaps indicating a bit of caution after the postelection stock market surge.
Much of the markets’ mixed reaction reflects uncertainty about a new president who has never held public office, leaving political leaders, business executives and international institutions to make bets on how a Trump administration may rewrite rules that have governed global affairs under American presidents of both parties.
“For allies and adversaries alike, the election of Donald Trump represents the likely abandonment of a decades-old U.S. commitment to uphold the global order,” said Ivo Daalder, a former United States ambassador to NATO who is now president of the Chicago Council on Global Affairs.
For some, there was initially a promising forecast. American and foreign stock markets climbed in what some analysts called “the Trump bump.” The Dow Jones industrial average has broken several records since the election, and last week topped 19,000 for the first time amid expectations of more business-friendly regulatory policies. Investment banks like Goldman Sachs have fared particularly well.
European firms have seen stock prices rise, too. Deutsche Bank, whose shares shot up as high as 17 percent after the election, has reasons for optimism beyond its longtime ties to Mr. Trump’s businesses. With the Justice Department proposing a $14 billion fine as it begins negotiations with the bank over its handling of mortgage-backed securities in the 2008 financial crisis, some in Germany hope a new administration will ease up and loosen regulations.
Another company that has seen its share value increase since the election is Magal Security Systems, an Israeli firm that helped develop high-tech security barriers around Gaza and the West Bank. With Mr. Trump’s promise to build a wall along the border with Mexico, investors expect that firms like Magal could get some of the business. Magal’s shares rose as high as 24 percent above their pre-election level, with trading volume as much as 150 times higher.
For the same reason, Mexico has taken an economic hit since the election. Besides the wall, Mr. Trump has vowed to withdraw from the North American Free Trade Agreement. Mexico’s peso has fallen sharply, and its central bank last week slashed its growth projection for next year, citing “the electoral process in the United States.”
Other economies have reacted with trepidation amid fears that Mr. Trump’s policies may drive up interest rates and inflation, an expectation that some traders call Trumpflation.
Some countries are trying to figure out how to respond in other ways. Leaders of NATO allies are looking at increasing military spending in response to Mr. Trump’s insistence that they pay a greater share of their defense. Lithuania last week chose a new prime minister, who renewed the nation’s promise to raise security spending.
In the Philippines, where President Rodrigo Duterte has feuded with President Obama, the government has tried to gain favor in Mr. Trump’s Washington. Mr. Duterte named as his new trade envoy to the United States Jose E. B. Antonio, a real estate tycoon who is helping build Trump Tower Manila. After Britain rebuffed Mr. Trump’s suggestion to name Nigel Farage, a leader of the “Brexit” campaign to leave the European Union, as ambassador to the United States, The Times of London reported that Mr. Farage may move to America anyway.
In many places, there is still much head scratching over Mr. Trump. The mass-circulation Bild Zeitung in Germany secured exclusive rights to translating into German the whole interview Mr. Trump gave to The New York Times last week. Bungeishunju, the Japanese publisher of “Trump Revealed,” by the Washington Post journalists Michael Kranish and Marc Fisher, reprinted an additional 10,000 copies.
In China, initial optimism about Mr. Trump is giving way to skepticism. “We should stop imagining what benefits Trump’s election could bring to China,” Zhu Chenghu, a retired major general, said at a seminar at the China Academy of Social Sciences in Beijing on Friday. “He will return to the traditional policies that rely on the role of the U.S. dollar and seek expansion overseas.”
Mr. Trump’s election is getting credit, or blame, for all sorts of events, no matter how tangential. In Russia, a newspaper interviewed an analyst who suggested that the arrest of a cabinet minister on bribery charges may have resulted from Mr. Trump’s success because Moscow no longer had to fear going after protégés of reformers who were once close to Washington.
Nowhere has the Trump Effect been more visible than in Jerusalem, where the political right has openly rejoiced at the election. Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, who has had a prickly relationship with Mr. Obama, has made clear to associates that he is overjoyed at Mr. Trump’s ascension.
Members of Mr. Netanyahu’s coalition expect Mr. Trump to abandon the practice of Mr. Obama and presidents of both parties who tried to restrain Israel from building housing in the West Bank and East Jerusalem. Shortly after the election, a Trump adviser said settlements were not an obstacle to peace, appearing to have adopted the argument Mr. Netanyahu makes.
“The next few weeks present a unique window of opportunity for Israel,” Naftali Bennett, who leads a pro-settler party in Mr. Netanyahu’s cabinet, told a conference sponsored by The Jerusalem Post last week. After years of American pressure, he added, “it’s ours to decide.”
Betty Herschman, the director of international relations for Ir Amim, a group that opposes settlement construction, said it was too early to know what Mr. Trump’s policy would actually be. But she said one thing was clear: “The Israeli right is already celebrating.”
A case in point was last week’s decision on 500 new housing units in Ramat Shlomo, an ultra-Orthodox neighborhood of annexed East Jerusalem across the “green line” delineating the border that existed until Israel won the 1967 war. The development had been in the works for years without being built. An announcement that it would proceed in 2010 while Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. was visiting Israel infuriated Mr. Obama and his team.
Brachie Sprung, a spokeswoman for Mayor Nir Barkat, said last week’s action by the municipal planning committee was a result of the developer’s coming back to the city with revisions to his plan that required new approval.
But it was easy to see the move in the context of the emerging Trump era. Meir Turgeman, the deputy mayor who leads the planning committee, had just days earlier promised to advance 7,000 housing units that were delayed under American pressure, and he named Ramat Shlomo as an example.
“I intend to exploit the change of the guard in the U.S.A. and bring them to approval,” Mr. Turgeman told Israel’s Channel 2. Until now, he said, there had been pressure from Mr. Netanyahu’s office not to proceed to avoid angering Washington. “That’s over. From now, we intend to take the plans out of deep freeze.”
One big fear in the weeks leading up to the presidential election was that Donald Trump would try to delegitimize the results by claiming rampant voter fraud — a bogus specter he had raised throughout the campaign, particularly as his polling numbers got worse.
In that scenario, of course, Mr. Trump was the loser. No one imagined he would say the election was rigged if he won. And yet here we are.
On Sunday, President-elect Trump unleashed a barrage of tweets complaining about calls for recounts or vote audits in several closely contested states, and culminating in this message: “In addition to winning the Electoral College in a landslide, I won the popular vote if you deduct the millions of people who voted illegally.”
This is a lie, part of Mr. Trump’s pattern, stretching back many years, of disregard for indisputable facts. There is no evidence of illegal voting on even a small scale anywhere in the country, let alone a systematic conspiracy involving “millions.” But this is the message that gets hammered relentlessly by right-wing propaganda sites like InfoWars, which is run by a conspiracy theorist who claims the Sandy Hook school massacre was a hoax — and whose absurdities Mr. Trump has often shouted through his megaphone, which will shortly bear the presidential seal. Mr. Trump added more fuel to the fire with the false claim of “serious voter fraud” in California, Virginia and New Hampshire — all states that went for Hillary Clinton.
In addition to insulting law-abiding voters everywhere, these lies about fraud threaten the foundations of American democracy. They have provided the justification for state voter-suppression laws around the country, and they could give the Trump administration a pretext to roll back voting rights on a national scale.
And why is Mr. Trump so hung up on the popular vote in the first place? After all, he won where it counts — in the Electoral College. And yet, in the three weeks since his victory, Mr. Trump has already admitted at least twice that he would prefer the presidency be determined by the popular vote, and not by 538 electors. It’s clear he feels threatened by Mrs. Clinton’s popular-vote lead — now more than 2.3 million and expected to exceed 2.5 million; as a percentage of the electorate, that is a wider margin than five presidents enjoyed. With support for third-party candidates added in, 54 percent of voters rejected Mr. Trump.
So maybe his touchiness is understandable. Like most people, Mr. Trump senses the fundamental unfairness of awarding the presidency to the loser of the popular vote. In fact, he made that argument himself, back on election night in 2012, calling the Electoral College “a disaster for democracy” when he believed, incorrectly, that President Obama would lose the popular vote and still win re-election. (In recent weeks he’s changed his tune, calling it a “genius” idea.) What Mr. Trump may not know, given his lack of interest in American history, is that the Electoral College was designed specifically to enhance the influence of white voters in Southern states, which were allowed to factor in their large slave populations.
Today the Electoral College continues to give an outsized benefit to smaller and less populous states — a Wyoming resident’s vote weighs 3.6 times more than a Californian’s. So the less populous states will never agree to amend it out of the Constitution. But states may allocate their electoral votes however they choose, and that opens the door to greater equity without changing the Constitution — namely, the National Popular Vote interstate compact. This is an agreement among a group of states to award all their electoral votes to the winner of the national popular vote. Eleven states and the District of Columbia have already adopted it, representing 165 electoral votes. The compact would take effect once states representing a majority of electoral votes, currently 270, signed on — ensuring that the national popular-vote winner became president.
We can’t expect Mr. Trump to throw his weight behind this initiative, given his new support for the Electoral College. But if he’s truly worried about the legitimacy of the 2016 election, why doesn’t he call for a recount?
Usually, the burden of proof for an outlandish claim rests on the person making the assertion. But Donald J. Trump is a master of making big claims, challenging others to disprove them and benefiting from the debate.
On Sunday, he alleged that Hillary Clinton won the popular vote because of millions of illegal votes, presumably many of them cast in California, which is still counting votes and which is providing her with much of her two-million-plus-vote advantage. He said there was “serious voter fraud in Virginia, New Hampshire and California.”
Mr. Trump has offered no evidence for this statement. That’s because there isn’t any.
California’s turnout was low.
If there were a few million fraudulent votes, the turnout rate in California would presumably be quite high. It was not. The turnout rate in California is projected to finish below the national average, according to estimates by Michael McDonald of the United States Elections Project. The turnout rate is based on the state’s voting-eligible population, which excludes noncitizens.
If California had a low turnout despite millions of noncitizen voters, its turnout rate would be among the lowest in the country — edging just above Hawaii and Utah for third lowest.
Other Republicans did quite well.
You would expect signs of noncitizen voting in the results. Mr. Trump would have presumably lost the most ground in areas with large noncitizen populations. Instead, his biggest losses came on the affluent coast: in Orange and Marin counties, in San Diego and Silicon Valley.
He underperformed Mitt Romney’s 2012 showing most in Orange County, a redoubt of 20th-century conservatism that voted Republican in every election from 1936 through 2012. Mr. Trump lost the county by a nine-point margin.
These same Orange County residents voted to re-elect all four of their Republican members of Congress — not the result one would expect if Mrs. Clinton were bolstered by a wave of unanimously Democratic illegal votes.
Studies cited don’t support it.
When asked on Monday for evidence to support Mr. Trump’s assertions, Jason Miller, his communications director, cited two studies that he said offered examples of voter fraud: a 2014 Washington Post study on noncitizen voting and a 2012 Pew study on the poor state of voter registration files.
Neither study could plausibly be construed to indicate that millions of illegal voters cast ballots in this election. Both were conducted well in advance of the election, and neither supports anything like what Mr. Trump has suggested.
What Mr. Miller referred to as the “Washington Post study” — actually an article by two professors on The Post’s Monkey Cage blog — used a survey to conclude that 6.4 percent of noncitizen adults voted in the 2008 election.
This study was widely criticized and later debunked. But even taken at face value, a 6.4 percent noncitizen voting rate would account for only one-fourth of Mrs. Clinton’s margin of victory in the popular vote.
And there is little reason to think that 6.4 percent of noncitizens voted in the 2008 election. The finding is based on the Cooperative Congressional Election Study, a huge study of tens of thousands of respondents. The 6.4 percent is based on just 21 survey respondents who indicated that they were noncitizens and voted.
That tiny number of respondents out of the tens of thousands who took the survey hints at a different explanation: measurement error.
Sometimes people make mistakes when they take a survey. They might misunderstand the question, accidentally give a wrong response to an interviewer or press the wrong button online. The interviewer can make a mistake, and record the wrong answer. This usually isn’t a significant problem, but it becomes one if you’re trying to find an odd, small finding in a survey of 30,000 people. Even if 99.9 percent of people answered a question correctly in the survey, there would still be 30 erroneous answers out of 30,000.
It turns out that number isn’t far off. The study is a panel survey, so many people had been interviewed in previous years. A comparison of their previous answers can help give a sense of just how often people might make a mistake. In 2012, 20 of the self-described noncitizens surveyed reported that they had been citizens when they took the survey in 2010. But that’s unlikely — very few people lose their citizenship.
What’s more, a similar number, 36 people, said they were noncitizens in 2010 but citizens in 2012. That’s possible — since people can obtain citizenship — but the finding is well above the rate of naturalization.
This phenomenon could explain all of the noncitizen voting in the congressional election study. Here’s the clincher: There were zero voters among the respondents who indicated that they were noncitizens in both 2010 and 2012.
Mr. Miller’s citation of a Pew Research study on the quality of voter registration files is far less salient. Yes, there are many millions of people who remain registered to vote after they have moved or died: Very few people remove themselves from the voter rolls when they move, or as they lie on their deathbed. But this has nothing to do with noncitizen voting, and it is not a meaningful contributor to voter fraud.
The political right has not been alone in making unsubstantiated claims about election or voter fraud this year. Some supporters of Bernie Sanders did the same thing in the primaries. The Green Party presidential candidate Jill Stein is pushing for recounts in Pennsylvania, Michigan and Wisconsin, though no recount has ever overturned a lead as large as Mr. Trump’s in these states.
Last week, a New York Magazine article made a splash by saying that some computer scientists believed there was evidence of voting irregularities in Wisconsin, based on Mr. Trump’s stronger showing in counties with electronic voting. This appears to be a mischaracterization of their views, but the view expressed in the article doesn’t hold up either. Mr. Trump’s edge in electronic-voting counties can be explained by their demographics: The counties are less educated and whiter than the parts of the state with paper ballots.
Ultimately, there’s not much that’s odd about the results. Mrs. Clinton underperformed in Wisconsin, but also in Iowa and Minnesota — states with paper ballots and, in Minnesota’s case, a Democratic government. She fared well in California, but gained just as much in Texas, a state with Republican government.
There’s a dominant pattern: Mr. Trump’s strength with white working-class voters helped him a lot in crucial battleground states like Michigan and Pennsylvania. Mrs. Clinton had strength with Hispanic voters and well-educated white voters, but it helped her more in noncompetitive states, like Texas and California. These demographic patterns help explain the results without any need to suspect voter fraud.
At Thanksgiving, many of us will be subject to — or subjecting our hosts to — a wide range of opinions about the 2016 election.
But some aspects of it are rooted in fact — not open to interpretation (Sorry, Uncle Bill). Below, we present a compendium of sorts about the election, to help guide you in your discussions. Some of these may seem basic, but they are by no means obvious to everyone. Don’t let them get in the way of a good holiday argument.
Hillary Clinton definitely won the popular vote, and that lead is only going to grow.
The New York Times called the election for Donald J. Trump at about 2:40 a.m. on Nov. 9. At that time, he had about 57.2 million votes, almost a million more than Hillary Clinton. Even before then, the signs pointed to her edge in the national popular vote.
Most of the votes that remain uncounted are in heavily Democratic places like California. Even roughly two weeks later, the state estimated that it had about two million ballots yet to be counted, including about 760,000 in Los Angeles County, where voters have preferred Mrs. Clinton by around 50 percentage points.
As the votes have trickled in, the popular vote has tilted toward Mrs. Clinton. As of Wednesday morning, that lead surpassed two million votes, or 1.5 percentage points better than Mr. Trump. (Our time-stamped estimates are courtesy of Dave Wasserman’s excellent popular vote tracker.) This lead is still growing, but it’s already a larger margin than in popular vote victories by Al Gore in 2000, Richard Nixon in 1968 and John F. Kennedy in 1960.
Turnout in the 2016 election was not low. It is about the same as it was in 2012 and comparable to most 20th-century presidential elections.
Turnout is simple to calculate: Take the total number of votes cast and divide it by the total number of adults who are eligible to vote, and presto, you have a turnout rate!
When the race was called, this math problem yielded a rate that was, indeed, historically low. It was also wrong, for the same reason Mrs. Clinton trailed in the popular vote at that time: Not all the ballots had been counted.
Because the denominator in this math problem — the number of voting-eligible adults on Election Day — does not change, the turnout rate goes up every time ballots are counted. As they have come in, the turnout rate has risen to about 57.7 percent. Michael McDonald at the United States Elections Project estimates that it will ultimately be closer to 58.4 percent, a bit lower than it was in 2012 and roughly comparable to most presidential elections in the last 100 years.
Yes, the polls were off, but not in extraordinary ways.
Mrs. Clinton held a modest but steady lead in nearly every national poll for months, and led most state polls in Florida, North Carolina, Pennsylvania, Michigan and Wisconsin. Yet she lost in each of these states.
So how wrong were the polls? On average, by about 3.4 percentage points in the closest states. That’s higher than in any election in decades, but comparable to polling misses in 1988 and 1992.
The 2016 polling miss feels much larger because the places where Mrs. Clinton fared worse than polls suggested were concentrated in a few battleground states. The places where she fared better than expected were in big liberal states, where she had almost no chance of losing. Nationally, these effects nearly canceled out, which is why her national polling lead before the election — three to four points — ended up being close to the result (which, again, is about a 1.5-point lead and is expected to grow as more votes come in).
Third-party candidates, like Gary Johnson and Jill Stein, may have cost Mrs. Clinton Michigan, but they almost certainly did not cost her the presidency.
The total vote tally says about 4 percent of all voters, about 5.8 million people, voted for Mr. Johnson (3.3 percent) or Ms. Stein (1 percent). In four battleground states that Mrs. Clinton lost — Florida, Pennsylvania, Wisconsin and Michigan — the votes for these third-party candidates exceeded Mr. Trump’s margin of victory. If those states had flipped, Mrs. Clinton would be president. Are third-party voters responsible for the Trump presidency?
With the exception of Michigan, third-party voters would have had to overwhelmingly favor Mrs. Clinton to flip the state. That notion also rests on a significant number of third-party voters coming to the polls, but many of them told pollsters that they would have stayed home if they could not have voted for their third-party candidate.
If we look at Mr. Trump’s margin of victory in these four states and the number of votes cast for Mr. Johnson or Ms. Stein, we’re left with a simple math problem: If those candidates did not exist, what share of those votes would Mrs. Clinton have needed to pick up to overtake Mr. Trump’s vote lead? The answer: a substantial share.
Might these voters really have preferred Mrs. Clinton to Mr. Trump to this degree and showed up to the polls at higher rates than they told pollsters they would? It’s possible. But for that vote to be decisive, Pennsylvania or Florida and at least one other state would have had to flip. The evidence we have suggests such an outcome would have been highly unlikely; if anything, the Johnson vote could have easily leaned toward Mr. Trump.
Exit polls are useful, but don’t give them too much credence.
As my colleague Nate Cohn has written, exit polls are helpful, but using them to come to conclusions about the precise composition of the electorate is risky — and frequently wrong. In 2012, they painted a picture of the electorate that was younger and more diverse than it really was.
Many important questions remain about precisely who voted, and why. Did poor Democratic turnout doom Mrs. Clinton, or were swing voters the key to Mr. Trump’s win? Did Mr. Trump really do better among Hispanic voters than Mitt Romney? Further analysis of the voter files — which show who voted and who didn’t — will provide more clarity in the months ahead. Exit polls alone are not a definitive way to answer these questions.
But a few things, as we’ve tried to explain, should be beyond debate, as should the idea that Thanksgiving dinner ought to include at least some time not devoted to politics.
One of the biggest reasons Donald Trump is considered to be a long shot to win the presidency is the diversity of the country.
As Joe Scarborough of MSNBC put it, “There are not enough white voters in America for Donald Trump to win while getting routed among minorities.”
But a growing body of evidence suggests that there is still a path, albeit a narrow one, for Mr. Trump to win without gains among nonwhite voters.
New analysis by The Upshot shows that millions more white, older working-class voters went to the polls in 2012 than was found by exit polls on Election Day. This raises the prospect that Mr. Trump has a larger pool of potential voters than generally believed.
The wider path may help explain why Mr. Trump is competitive in early general election surveys against Hillary Clinton. And it calls into question the prevailing demographic explanation of recent elections, which held that Barack Obama did very poorly among whites and won only because young and minority voters turned out in record numbers. This story line led Republicans to conclude that they had maximized their support from white voters and needed to reach out to Hispanics to win in 2016.
Those previous conclusions emerged from exit polls released on election night. The new data from the census, voter registration files, polls and the finalized results tells a subtly different story with potential consequences for the 2016 election.
The data implies that Mr. Obama was not as weak among white voters as typically believed. He fared better than his predecessors among white voters outside the South. Demographic shifts weren’t so important: He would have been re-elected even with an electorate as old and white as it was in 2004. Latino voters did not put Mr. Obama over the top, as many argued in the days after Mr. Obama’s re-election. He would have won even if he had done as poorly among Latino voters as John Kerry.
This is all good news for Mr. Trump. There’s more room for him to make gains among white working-class voters than many assumed — enough to win without making gains among nonwhite or college-educated white voters.
But Mr. Trump’s narrow path could close if he loses ground among well-educated voters and alienates even more nonwhite voters than Mitt Romney did four years ago. His ratings among these groups remain poor, and he continues to draw fresh criticism, most recently for saying the judge overseeing a lawsuit against Trump University is biased because of his Mexican heritage.
When you hear about the demographic challenges facing the Republican Party, almost all of the data comes from exit polls: surveys conducted with tens of thousands of voters at precincts across the country on Election Day, along with a supplemental telephone survey with early voters.
The exit polls are excellent surveys. But like any survey, they’re imperfect. The problem is that analysts, including me, have treated the exit polls like a precise account of the electorate.
“There are campaigns and journalists who take the exit polls as the word of God about the shape of the electorate and their voting propensities,” said Michael McDonald, a political scientist at the University of Florida who researches voter turnout. “They’re meant to tell us why people voted. They’re not designed to tell us much about the demographic profile of the electorate.”
The exit polls have a series of subtle biases that depict a younger, better-educated and more diverse electorate. Mr. McDonald tentatively reached this conclusion in 2005, and the pattern has been seen in a broader set of data.
The evidence for a whiter, less-educated and older electorate comes from two main sources.
The first — and longest-standing — source of alternative data is the Current Population Survey, known as the C.P.S. Conducted by the Census Bureau, it is the same monthly survey that yields the unemployment report. After elections, it includes a question about whether people voted.
A second source is the so-called voter file: a compilation of local records on every American who has registered to vote, including address, age and whether the person voted in a given election. The voter file data used for analysis here comes from Catalist, a Democratic data firm that offers an academic subscription. Researchers have found that the data is unbiased and more accurate than public voting records.
These sources show a 2012 electorate that was far whiter, older and less educated than the exit polls indicated.
Over all, the exit polls suggest that 23 percent of voters in 2012 were white, over age 45 and without a college degree. Catalist puts this group at 29 percent, and the census at 30 percent — implying 10 million more voters than the 23 percent figure.
What’s the best estimate? That’s a matter for debate.
“The truth, if you could ever get to it, is probably somewhere between the three measures,” said Joe Lenski, the vice president at Edison Research, who runs the exit poll, “because they all have their faults.”
They do have their faults. Just about every year, the census reports more people voted than actually did — especially in Southern states with a large black population. The census also has a challenge with people who decline to say whether they voted.
Things can go wrong with the voter file, too, if, say, the state erred in data entry or updates. The models are imperfect as well.
But for many experts in the field, these issues pale next to those facing the exit polls. For Bernard Fraga, a professor of political science at Indiana University, there is “no question that the exit poll is not as accurate.” He added, “It’s clearly much more reliable to look at the C.P.S. or even better to look at the voter file-based work.” Today, virtually all major campaign polling, voter targeting and election law litigation is conducted using voter file data.
The actual results also tend to imply that the census and Catalist figures make a lot more sense in many of the cases where the disagreements are greatest.
Take Ohio, where the exit polls show that the black share of the electorate increased by four percentage points to more than 15 percent of voters in 2012. If these figures are taken as precise, it would imply that nearly 250,000 more black voters turned out than in 2008, with the turnout reaching 88 percent of adult black citizens. There is no trace of this kind of surge in turnout in the actual result. The black turnout in Cleveland actually dropped — to 55 percent of adult citizens.
This type of story repeats itself across the battlegrounds. It also plays out with age, where the exit polls imply that youth turnout was higher than turnout among seniors; with education, where the exit polls show that more college graduates voted than actually live in America; or Hispanics, where the exit polls show that white and Hispanic turnout was nearly equal, despite decades of evidence to the contrary. You can see more of this data here.
The Democratic Dependence on White Working-Class Voters
The larger number of white working-class voters implies that Democrats are far more dependent on winning white working-class voters, and therefore more vulnerable to a populist candidate like Mr. Trump.
Over all, 34 percent of Mr. Obama’s supporters were white voters without a college degree, compared with 25 percent in the exit polls, according to an Upshot statistical model that integrated census data, actual results and 15,000 interviews from various pre-election surveys. The model yields a full alternative to the exit polls that assume an older, whiter electorate like the one depicted by the census. (For those interested in the details about our estimates, we’ve written a technical sidebar.)
“This is a great way to deal with the limits of traditional surveys,” said Andrew Gelman, a professor at Columbia who popularized the statistical technique known as multilevel regression and post-stratification. “It smooths out noise, reduces bias and arrives at better estimates for smaller groups.”
Mr. Obama’s dependence among white voters might seem surprising in light of the 2012 postelection consensus. But it won’t be surprising if you think just a little further back — to the pre-election story line. Mr. Obama’s advantage heading into the election was thought to be a “Midwestern Firewall” — a big edge in Midwestern battlegrounds where white working-class voters supported the auto bailout and were skeptical of Mr. Romney, who was criticized for his time at Bain Capital.
The pre-election story line was tossed aside when the national exit polls showed an electorate that was even more diverse than it was in 2008, while showing Mr. Obama faring worse among white voters than any Democrat since Walter Mondale in 1984.
But the Upshot analysis shows that all of Mr. Obama’s weaknesses were in the South — defined as the former Confederacy plus Oklahoma, Missouri, Kentucky and West Virginia — where he won just 26 percent.
In most Northern states, white voters shifted left. In the South, the opposite happened.
Outside the South, he won 46 percent of white voters, even running ahead of Mr. Kerry and Al Gore in earlier elections.
Many of the regions where Mr. Obama lost ground in white areas outside the South — like the energy-producing areas of North Dakota or Appalachia, Mormon Utah, culturally Southern stretches of Southern Illinois, or Mr. Kerry and Mr. Romney’s home state of Massachusetts — were exceptions that proved the rule.
The Upshot obtained similar estimates for 2012 from Mr. Ghitza, who matched polling data to the Catalist voter registration file, in his dissertation on the use of big data in politics. Mr. Ghitza found similar figures as The Upshot’s estimates using different data sets and different models.
Demographics Overrated. The data implies that demographic shifts played a somewhat smaller role in Mr. Obama’s re-election than the postelection narrative suggested. Even if the electorate were as old and as white as it was in 2004, Mr. Obama would have won, because of the gains he made among white voters in states like New Mexico, Colorado and Iowa.
Hispanic voters played only a modest role in Mr. Romney’s defeat. They cost him Florida — a must-win state for Republicans, but also the closest contest. Elsewhere, Mr. Obama would have easily survived even if Mr. Romney had equaled George W. Bush’s 2004 share of Hispanic voters.
All of this is good news for a Republican who intends to win with greater strength among white working-class voters, like Mr. Trump.
There is a downside for him. The lower turnout among Hispanic and young voters implies that it’s possible — even easy — to imagine a huge increase in Hispanic and youth turnout in 2016. And Mr. Obama’s strength among Northern white voters raises doubts about whether the Republicans, including Mr. Trump, can assume that white working-class voters are receptive to conservative candidates.
The best case for Mr. Trump is that white Northerners reluctantly backed Mr. Obama because Mr. Romney was successfully caricatured as a rapacious plutocrat.
Yet it’s hard to argue that the attacks on Bain Capital were responsible for Mr. Obama’s gains among young and college-educated white voters. These voters moved decisively in Mr. Obama’s direction, perhaps in part because of cultural issues. If that’s right, Mr. Trump will be hard pressed to reverse Mr. Obama’s gains — and there’s plenty of evidence he could slip further.
The Missing-White-Voter Theory. There has long been a notion that Mr. Romney was hurt by “missing white voters,” those who voted in 2008 but skipped the 2012 presidential election. And the G.O.P.’s hope is that Mr. Trump could benefit with a surge of those Republican-leaning voters. But that view of 2012 is largely unsupported by the data.
The decline in white turnout in 2012 was particularly marked among registered Democrats, according to data from Catalist. Republican turnout dropped a bit as well, but it was less than the drop among Democrats across every age cohort. And among voters over age 60, Republican turnout increased.
According to data from L2, a nonpartisan voter file vendor, the missing white voters were far more likely to be registered Democrats, or to have participated in Democratic primaries, than the white voters who actually did turn out.
Is it possible that some of these Democrats are actually ready to vote for Mr. Trump? Yes. But it’s a stretch to argue that a huge share of them would have voted for Mr. Romney or would vote for Mr. Trump, especially considering how young they are. (Mr. Trump’s support is weaker among the young). They could just as easily be supporters of Bernie Sanders.
Even if the missing white voters were disproportionately Republican, a return to previous turnout levels wouldn’t have been anywhere near enough to get Mr. Romney over the top. There were far fewer missing white voters in the battleground states than there were nationally. There weren’t close to enough of them to flip the outcome in key states.
The real pool of missing white voters are those who haven’t participated in any recent election, or aren’t even registered to vote. There are millions of these missing white voters — but they will be much harder to mobilize. Many are young, and might not be especially favorable to Mr. Trump. The older ones are true bystanders in American politics.
Can Trump Pull It Off?
To win, Mr. Trump will need to make gains among white working-class voters. The earliest evidence, and polling this early can be quite inaccurate, suggests that he is doing that handily.
So far, Mr. Trump leads Mrs. Clinton by 27 points among white voters without a degree, 58 percent to 31 percent, in the last six national surveys from major news organizations. In the final 2012 polls, Mr. Romney led by just 19 points among such voters, 58 percent to 39 percent, over Mr. Obama.
One of the big questions for Mr. Trump is whether his polling gains among that group, should they hold, will manifest themselves in battleground states. Mr. Romney’s national gains over Mr. Bush did him relatively little good: They were concentrated in the South and Appalachia, where they had little influence on the Electoral College. For now, it’s an open question whether Mr. Trump will make outsize gains in important states like Iowa, Ohio or Wisconsin, where he struggled in the primary season.
Mr. Trump’s big advantage among white working-class voters hasn’t translated to a much stronger position in national polls. That’s because he is underperforming Mr. Romney’s 2012 results among white voters with a college degree and nonwhite voters, often by a far greater amount than he’s gaining among working-class whites.
The same polls show Mrs. Clinton leading among college-educated white voters by 47 percent to 42 percent. It’s a reversal from 2012, when Mr. Romney led that group by six points, 52 percent to 46 percent in the final polls.
Even modest additional gains for Mrs. Clinton among well-educated white voters or nonwhite voters would quickly start to make things very challenging for Mr. Trump.
If Mr. Trump lost five points among well-educated white voters and Hispanics, which is how he’s doing in current polls, his target for white working-class voters would quickly skyrocket. In a battleground state like Colorado, for example, he would need to gain 15 percentage points more of the white working class.
Whether Mr. Trump can suppress his losses among well-educated voters and Latinos will be decided by a lot more than demographics. Usually, the so-called fundamentals — including the current president’s approval rating and the pace of economic growth — play a big role in determining whether voters will support the incumbent’s party. This year, there are other big questions: whether Mr. Trump’s penchant to offend goes too far, and whether Mrs. Clinton has an advantage with women and faces a penalty among men (and which is bigger).
So far, the polls suggest he will lose too much ground among well-educated and nonwhite voters to win. But the diversity of the country in itself does not rule out a victory for Mr. Trump.
Polls from Quinnipiac University this morning showed very close races between Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump in Pennsylvania, Florida and Ohio. (He leads her by four percentage points in Ohio.)
Nate Cohn, The Upshot’s politics analyst, and Toni Monkovic, an Upshot editor, discussed the polls and other battleground states in a Slack chat that has been lightly edited:
Toni What do you make of the Quinnipiac polling today? It’s sure to scare liberals.
Nate I think there are two basic ways to look at them.
On the one hand, the preponderance of evidence suggests that Clinton has a comfortable edge in the battleground states. Quinnipiac, for good measure, has been pretty tough on the Democrats over the last few cycles. You can see some sign of that in the racial composition of the surveys. In Florida, for instance, Quinnipiac’s registered voters are 69 percent white, 11 percent black and 15 percent Hispanic. The official data from the Florida secretary of state (since voters are asked their race when they register to vote) is 65.7 percent white, 13.3 percent black and 14.8 percent Hispanic. Similarly, the census’ current population survey in 2014 found that 64.3 percent of registered voters were white, 15.2 percent were black and 17.9 percent Hispanic.
On the other hand, this can be a pretty volatile period in the race. The polls typically get a lot more accurate between the end of the primaries and the few weeks after the conventions. The parties unify, the electorate gets a bit more polarized. You could imagine something similar benefiting Donald Trump, who has just wrapped up the nomination and has an opportunity to consolidate Republican voters. So I think we should keep an eye out over the next few months to see whether he benefits from the end of the primary process.
These Quinnipiac polls are among the first since he wrapped up the nomination. We can’t rule out the possibility that there’s some real movement here.
One thing I would note, though, is that Trump is basically winning the same share of Republicans as Clinton is winning of Democrats. So I don’t think it’s obvious that either candidate has much more to gain from party unity — at least compared to the other. Gallup came out today with numbers on that.
Toni In general, though, people should not fixate on individual polls of states this early.
Nate Yeah, I think that’s right. It’s always better to look at the preponderance of data. There’s a lot of it right now, and it’s consistent with a pretty considerable edge for Clinton nationwide and in the battleground states. A few state polls won’t change that calculus.
If all of the polls start turning toward Trump, that would be far more important.
I’d probably just watch the national polls right now.
As long as Trump is down by these sort of margins in the national popular vote, there’s not much reason to think too hard about the Electoral College.
Toni With the understanding that it’s very early, let’s start our tour of battleground states with Pennsylvania. It’s practically sacred home ground for Democrats. In sports playoff series, if you can defend your home field, you put yourself in position to win, and if you can’t you’re in trouble. But early signs suggest Hillary Clinton is not in trouble in Pennsylvania, right?
Nate Well, I guess I think of it like this: Clinton isn’t in trouble nationally, and therefore she isn’t in trouble in Pennsylvania. Clinton, at least so far, appears to be winning over many more college-educated white voters than she’s losing white working-class voters. That’s giving her a lead nationally and in Pennsylvania. If that stops being true, though — if Clinton starts losing ground among white working-class voters — that will hurt her more in Pennsylvania than in Virginia or Florida.
Toni When you say college-educated white voters, are we talking especially about suburban mothers (who may have voted for Mitt Romney in 2012) in places like the Philadelphia suburbs?
Nate The early polls do suggest that Trump is especially weak among college-educated women and suburban voters. So I think that’s probably a pretty good way to look at it.
Toni Colorado is a state you felt Marco Rubio was well suited to win if voters had been allowed to participate in a primary there. That doesn’t seem to bode well for Trump, along with the fact that it has a fairly sizable Hispanic population.
Nate Yeah, Colorado seems like a really tough state for Trump. There are more college-educated and Hispanic Republicans for Trump to lose than there are white working-class Obama voters for him to win over.
Toni The Trump campaign doesn’t seem to talk as much about making gains in Colorado and Nevada. They’re obviously important states, but when Trump talks strategy, he seems to be focusing more on the Midwest/Rust Belt.
Nate I can’t blame them. Some simple factors at play for Colorado and Nevada: above-average Hispanic populations and a below-average number of white working-class Democrats.
Toni But when you turn to the Midwest, you run into a state like Wisconsin. It’s a state the Trump campaign would love to flip. But it doesn’t seem to set up well for him — stylistically, demographically, ideologically. Agree?
Nate Yeah, I agree. For most of this conversation, we’ve been talking about the “white working class” as a single demographic category. But the white working class is fairly diverse. White working-class voters in Appalachia, for instance, have behaved very differently from those across the Northern tier in recent cycles (Obama lost a lot of ground in Appalachia, but did better than John Kerry or Al Gore in a place like Wisconsin). There was a fairly similar split with Trump in the primary. He did really well with white working-class voters in Appalachia and the industrial Midwest, but really struggled in places like Iowa and Wisconsin, or Vermont and Minnesota. So I wouldn’t be very surprised if it turned out that Trump made gains among white working-class voters nationally, but didn’t pick up much or anything in a state like Wisconsin.
Toni Iowa seemed to be a promising pickup state for Republicans heading into this year, with a big victory by Joni Ernst in the 2014 midterms, for example. But it has similarities with Wisconsin. Trump didn’t win in Iowa. Ted Cruz did. And conservative talk radio — and a large group of true conservative voters — may be a problem, the way they could be in Wisconsin in causing G.O.P. defections. (Referring here to radio hosts like Steve Deace in Iowa and Charlie Sykes in Wisconsin.)
Nate Yeah, Iowa often seems to be a promising opportunity for the Republicans and then doesn’t quite come through in the end. I remember that NBC News characterized the state as “Lean Romney” at the outset of the 2012 cycle, perhaps in part on the assumption that Obama’s struggle among white working-class voters nationally augured poorly for him in an overwhelmingly white working-class state.
But white working-class voters in the Upper Midwest seem a bit more reluctant to embrace the modern conservative G.O.P. I’m not sure if it’s because of lower levels of racial resentment, lower levels of evangelical Christianity, the stronger economy, some combination of all of it, or something else. But it wouldn’t be a surprise if this proved to be a problem for Trump again.
Toni Most G.O.P. voters in Ohio did not invest in Trump with a primary vote. John Kasich, a more mainstream Republican, held on to his home state. Any possible residual effect from Trump’s loss? It would help a little if Kasich were his vice president, I suppose.
Nate I don’t know how much to read into Trump’s struggle in Ohio in the primary against a very popular incumbent. I guess all I would say is that if Trump can’t be competitive in Ohio, he’s not going to even come close nationally, or in states like Virginia and Colorado.
Toni What about New Hampshire? Trump connected well there with Republican voters, and Clinton lost badly to Bernie Sanders — it was one of her worst defeats in a battleground state. But the state seems to be trending blue.
Nate I think New Hampshire’s an interesting test for Trump. It’s extremely white. There are a lot of white Democrats without a degree. It’s another state that I think would quickly become competitive if Trump could make gains nationally, but, right now, he’s bleeding too much support among well-educated whites to be close in the current polls.
Toni Virginia is another state that slowly seems to be trending blue. Rubio finished a solid second in the state, with strength in Northern Virginia.
Nate It’s a really tough state for Trump. Virginia is in a tight race with Florida for the distinction of being the battleground state where Obama was least dependent on the support of white working-class voters. It’s also near the top of the list for states where Romney was most dependent on nonwhite or college-educated white voters — again sitting up near Florida and Colorado, so there’s a lot of room for Trump to lose support as well.
Of all the close battleground states, I might be more surprised by a Trump win here than anywhere else. I’d also note that the affluence and establishment-friendly politics of Northern Virginia probably blunt Trump’s appeal more here than anywhere else.
Toni O.K., you mentioned Florida. Trump won convincingly there (as did Clinton), ending Rubio’s campaign. But a large Hispanic population seems to present a challenge for him. And even the Cuban population, normally reliably Republican, isn’t as big a conservative force as it used to be.
Nate I think Florida’s a really dangerous state for Trump. Forget for a moment how much the Republicans would like to make gains among Hispanic voters and think instead about how much room they have to fall in Florida. Romney won something near 40 percent of the Hispanic vote in Florida in 2012, and they represented a well-above-average share of the electorate. Can Trump really win 40 percent of the Hispanic vote there again, especially after he went after home-state favorites like Jeb Bush and Marco Rubio? Then factor in the rapid pace of demographic change and the extent that Obama already lost a ton of ground among older, white working-class voters in the state. Suddenly it’s really hard to figure out how Trump is going to win the closest battleground state from the last election, even if he fixes his problem with well-educated white voters nationally.
I think there’s a real case that Florida could save Democrats in a close election — the sort of election where they’re in danger of losing whiter states where Democrats have more room to lose ground, like Pennsylvania or Iowa.
Toni North Carolina went for Romney in 2012 (after going for Obama in 2008), but do you think Trump could be hurt by some of the policies by the Republicans who control the state? Even though the G.O.P. has made it tougher to vote, my sense is that Democrats will be motivated and turnout will be intense.
Nate I don’t know how much the North Carolina government will help or hurt Trump. The turnout in a presidential election is always high, and there’s not too much room for state politics to make a dent. To me, Trump’s problem is pretty similar to the one he has in Virginia: There aren’t many opportunities for him to take advantage of his strengths, and there are plenty of opportunities for him to lose Republican-leaning college-educated voters.
If black turnout is high — and I expect it will be — North Carolina is going to be very close, regardless of what happens nationwide.
Toni Mitch Stewart, who served as battleground states director for President Obama’s 2012 re-election campaign, said that Michigan was the state Democrats should worry most about being flipped. Essentially, his argument was that Obama had an easy time against Mitt Romney in 2012 because of the auto bailout issue. “Some of the statements that Mitt Romney made, even though his father was governor there, almost disqualified him immediately in Michigan,” he said on MSNBC. “It’s a state that should be much closer than it has been in presidentials.”
Trump said: “We’ll win places that a lot of people say you’re not going to win, that as a Republican you can’t win. Michigan is a great example; nobody else will go to Michigan. We’re going to be encamped in Michigan because I think I can win it.”
Nate I think it’s hard to argue that Obama was helped so much by the auto bailout that the state would have otherwise been especially competitive. Obama won this state by 9.5 points in 2012, or a little less than six points better than he did nationally. That’s about what happened for Kerry in 2004, who won by 3.5 when Bush won by 2.5 points.
Also, Michigan is not just a state of autoworkers. Black voters represent an above-average share of the electorate. There are a lot of well-educated white voters around Detroit, or Lansing and Ann Arbor. Trump did very poorly in the primary in heavily Dutch Western Michigan, which is the real conservative base in the state.
To me, Trump does have opportunities to make inroads among Democratic-leaning white voters in Michigan, much as he does in Pennsylvania and Ohio. The difference is that Obama won Michigan by more than nine points in 2012; the Democrats have a big cushion. They can lose a lot of ground and still squeak it out, like Kerry and Al Gore did.
Toni Georgia, Arizona — maybe even Missouri, Indiana, Utah. There’s talk they could all be put in play. But that seems to be mostly a distraction. If Arizona and Georgia are competitive in late October, that probably means the Clinton campaign is in a commanding position where it really matters, right?
Nate Yeah, I agree. If we’re talking about Georgia and Arizona in October, we probably don’t need to be talking very much about the presidential race at all.
That said, I’d note that Missouri, Indiana and Arizona all have second-tier Senate races that might come in play along with the presidential race, if Democrats are so fortunate.
Toni Presuming that Clinton locks up the Democratic primary, where should the Clinton team send Bill Clinton to campaign? And Sanders if he rallies to support Clinton? Would he go to New Hampshire and Michigan?
Nate I think a quick Hillary Clinton-Sanders unity tour through New Hampshire, Boulder, Ann Arbor and Madison wouldn’t be too surprising. I think Bill Clinton is probably at his best in Ohio and Pennsylvania, which is also where the Obama campaign tended to use him.
Toni A wrap-up question: In an ideal world for the Trump campaign, you would take some of his extra strength from G.O.P. voters in the East (where he’ll most likely do poorly because there are so many entrenched blue states) and in the South (where he’ll most likely win a lot of red states regardless) and redistribute it to the Midwest, where he could hope to win more white voters and turn some blue states red. In other words, it would do him a lot more good if his specific appeal were tailored more to the Midwest. But the Midwest or Rust Belt just doesn’t seem as inviting as the Trump campaign has been suggesting.
Nate Ha ha, well, if he could, I’m sure he’d love to move every last Republican voter from New York and California to Ohio, Pennsylvania and Florida. I’m not sure whether there’s an actionable strategy here. I do think there’s a fair point about Republicans and the South. They’ve been running up the score among white Southerners for decades without getting much in the North. That trend has to come to an end at some point, and the Democratic advantage in the Electoral College would start to look pretty flimsy if the Republicans started to make further gains in the Upper Midwest instead of Appalachia.
A businessman with a lifetime of experience in management has been elected president of the United States. Donald J. Trump’s administration may be viewed as an experiment — an opportunity to discover whether one particular businessman’s perspective and skills will be assets in governing a nation.
Mr. Trump’s background evidently appealed to voters, but he should be careful not to be overconfident. His election may be a culmination of a trend in society of lionizing business stars and expecting too much of them.
We’ve seen this phenomenon in the outlandish salaries paid to top chief executives and in the public enthusiasm for them. Rakesh Khurana, dean of Harvard College, described the trend eloquently in his book “Searching for a Corporate Savior: The Irrational Quest for Charismatic C.E.O.s” (Princeton, 2002). He discerned a long trend in American business toward choosing chief executives from outside a company and paying them handsomely for some presumed business flair despite their ignorance of the long-term internal issues facing a company.
Professor Khurana warned that expecting these people to perform acts of genius was asking for trouble. The charismatic outsider tends to become authoritarian, alienating others in the company. The executive’s desperate efforts to live up to their promise may sometimes result in wild gambles. There are grounds for concern that President Trump could be this kind of outsider chief executive.
Mr. Trump has a number of business books to his name, all written with co-authors. Often these books are amusing, if simplistic and boastful. “How to Get Rich” (Random House, 2004, written with Meredith McIver) has advice like “Business Rule #1: If you don’t tell people about your success, they probably won’t know about it,” “Business Rule #2: Keep it short, fast and direct” and “Business Rule #3: Begin working at a young age. I did.” Maybe these nostrums are important for Mr. Trump but they seem to have little to do with making a country rich.
But there is still possibly another, more interesting strand in his advice: Mr. Trump’s admonition to be ambitious.
“How to Get Rich” also includes a “final rule,” “Think big and live large.” The book says: “In some ways, it’s easier to buy a skyscraper than a small house in a bad section of Brooklyn.” I’ve actually been giving a version of this advice for years to my students: Go for big ideas and avoid the trivia. My version of big and Mr. Trump’s are different, of course: He is known for his large, splashy buildings, while I try to encourage out-of-the-box economic ideas. Big ideas can lead to great things when they are encouraged, perhaps especially by a president.
Ambitious thinking led to big infrastructure projects like the Hoover Dam, the Golden Gate Bridge and La Guardia Airport, the kinds of projects we could use today. It also led to intellectual and humane triumphs, like the Dorothea Lange  record of poverty in America, financed by the New Deal program the Farm Security Administration. Those stunning images gave dignity to the people of that difficult time.
A business-oriented president could be helpful in this intellectual world, too, by taking actions like doubling the budget for the National Science Foundation, which was created in 1950 when Harry S. Truman was president, and infusing the National Institutes of Health, the National Endowment for the Arts and the National Endowment for the Humanities with more cash. But of course a president must resist the temptation to meddle in their grant-making process. These are democratic institutions and must stay that way.
An inspirational business-oriented president would also promote enlightened business thinking — an approach that would embrace kindness and consideration to all people, workers included, and wouldn’t be focused only on those destined for fortunes. The country could also use an emphasis on the technical side of business, an aspect that may be unexciting and even off-putting to many people but remains very important. I’m thinking of such things as actuarial science, accounting, securitization and structured products.
Business has many dimensions. Consider another book, one by Georgia Levenson Keohane, the executive director of the Pershing Square Foundation. It is “Capital and the Common Good: How Innovative Finance Is Tackling the World’s Most Urgent Problems” (Columbia University Press, 2016).
Ms. Keohane focuses on the welfare of those people who aren’t anywhere close to becoming billionaires. She describes the theory and history of social impact bonds, green bonds, vaccine bonds, microfinance, public-private partnerships and other routes to financial inclusion. Ms. Keohane has many ideas that could do much good and could conceivably be pursued much further under a business-oriented president.
In the best of outcomes, Mr. Trump will find a way to live up to this opportunity in the coming years, carefully fulfilling a promise to bring in the “best and most serious people” in the business community rather than the most loyal — choosing people who have a history of thinking big while not overreaching and who have technical expertise and compassion as well.
To be truly successful, Mr. Trump shouldn’t shoot for flashes of genius with immediate results. It would be better to work patiently, in the hope of bettering lives over the long run. With the proper approach, modern business could really improve the work of our government institutions.
Betsy DeVos, a wealthy Republican philanthropist, whom Donald J. Trump selected on Wednesday as the next secretary of education, has spent her career promoting a market-based, privatized vision of public education. If she pursues that agenda in her new role, she is quite likely to face disappointment and frustration.
Market-based school reforms generally come in two flavors: vouchers and charter schools. They differ in both structure and political orientation. Charter schools are public schools, open to all, accountable in varying degrees to public authorities, and usually run by nonprofit organizations. Vouchers, by contrast, allow students to attend any school, public or private, including those run by religious organizations and for-profit companies.
While charters enjoy support from most Republicans and some Democrats, vouchers have a narrower political base, those who tend to favor free markets to replace many government responsibilities.
Working primarily in Michigan, Ms. DeVos has been a strong advocate of vouchers, and her charter work has often focused on making charter schools as private as possible. The large majority of Michigan charters are run by for-profit companies, in contrast with most states. The DeVos family donated more than $1 million to Republican lawmakers earlier this year during a successful effort to oppose new oversight of charters.
That support made Ms. Devos a natural choice for Mr. Trump, who proposed a $20 billion federal voucher program on the campaign trail, and has likened the public school system to a monopoly business that needs to be broken up.
But any effort to promote vouchers from Washington will run up against the basic structures of American education.
The United States spends over $600 billion a year on public K-12 schools. Less than 9 percent of that money comes from the federal government, and it is almost exclusively dedicated to specific populations of children, most notably students with disabilities and students in low-income communities. There are no existing federal funds that can easily be turned into vouchers large enough to pay for school tuition on the open market.
Mr. Trump’s $20 billion proposal would be, by itself, very expensive. It may be hard to fit into a budget passed by a Republican Congress that has pledged to enact large tax cuts for corporations and citizens, expand the military and eliminate the budget deficit, all at the same time. Yet $20 billion isn’t nearly enough to finance vouchers nationwide, which is why Mr. Trump’s proposal assumes that states will kick in another $110 billion.
States don’t have that kind of money lying around. The only plausible source is existing school funding. But even if Ms. DeVos were to find a willing governor and state legislature, it’s not that easy. Roughly half of all nonfederal education funding comes from local property taxes raised by over 13,000 local school districts. They and their elected representatives will have a say, too.
This is where the intersection of geography and politics makes any national voucher plan much more difficult to enact. The practicality of school choice is highly related to population density. Children need to be able to get from home to school and back again every day. In a large metropolis with public transportation, there could be dozens of schools within reasonable travel distance of most families. In a small city, town or rural area, there will be few or none.
And population density, as Americans saw in the last election, is increasingly the dividing line of the nation’s politics. A significant number of Mr. Trump’s most ardent supporters live in sparsely populated areas where school choice is logistically unlikely. At the same time, many of the municipalities where market reforms are theoretically much easier to put in voted overwhelmingly against the president-elect.
On Election Day, voters in liberal Massachusetts rejected a ballot measure by a 62-38 margin that would have increased the number of charter schools in the state, despite strong evidence that the state’s well-supervised charters produce superior results for low-income and minority schoolchildren.
In theory, information technology offers a way around the population density problem. Virtual schools can be attended from anywhere with an internet connection. For-profit colleges that have pocketed billions of dollars by offering low-quality online courses are poised to make a comeback under the Trump administration, which is likely to roll back President Obama’s efforts to regulate them.
But the federal government is a much larger financial contributor to colleges and universities than to K-12 schools, and college students don’t need an adult looking after them all day. Ms. DeVos will probably be a boon to the relatively small, growing population of families that home-school their children. But most parents will still want their children in a school building during the day, taught by a teacher, not by a computer.
Ms. Devos will also be hamstrung by the fact that her deregulated school choice philosophy has not been considered a resounding success. In her home state, Detroit’s laissez-faire choice policies have led to a wild west of cutthroat competition and poor academic results. While there is substantial academic literature on school vouchers and while debates continue between opposing camps of researchers, it’s safe to say that vouchers have not produced the kind of large improvements in academic achievement that market-oriented reformers originally promised.
Donald J. Trump, through decades in public life, has been consistent on one core policy idea: that the United States has gotten a raw deal from its major trading partners in the agreements that bind their economies. Renegotiating those terms will surely be a top priority for his administration.
But what will that mean in practice? While the broad thrust of Mr. Trump’s thinking on trade is clear, and he has mentioned a few specific policies he would embrace, he and his appointees will have wide latitude in how they pursue more favorable trade arrangements for the United States. A YouTube video released on Monday reiterated a campaign promise to withdraw from the Trans-Pacific Partnership and more vaguely vowed to “negotiate fair, bilateral trade deals that bring jobs and industry back onto American shores.”
Since Election Day, trade experts have been gaming potential scenarios of what Trump administration trade policy might look like in detail. Some of those possibilities would risk only modest disruptions to the world economy and could very well result in better long-term arrangements for American companies.
Others would blow up the underpinnings of the modern global economy, endanger trillions of dollars’ worth of cross-border commerce, and stand a good chance of prompting a worldwide recession.
Here’s what those possibilities look like, from the most benign to the most disruptive.
Scenario 1: The assertive stance, within existing institutions
There really are some elements of the United States’ existing relationships with major trading partners that are dysfunctional and disadvantageous to the United States. By taking more aggressive stands on some of them, a Trump administration may be able to get better deals.
Mr. Trump has said repeatedly that he wants to renegotiate the North American Free Trade Agreement. A lot of things can fit under the rubric of “renegotiate,” though, and there is room to update the deal in ways that would prove beneficial to the United States. The agreement is 23 years old, after all. And there is plenty of room to adjust terms in ways that preserve the deeply intertwined North American economy.
“There are too many parts of it that are not working,” said David Malpass, an economist on the Trump transition team, at an event in October. “There is supposed to be regular annual review between the parties of Nafta to see where it’s not working well and to have kind of a constant process of renewal. That’s been dropped away. And so that’s something that needs to be looked at.”
The Trump administration could also pick a variety of industries where it believes trade partners have treated the United States unfairly and bring cases before the World Trade Organization. Paired with targeted duties to punish what it sees as unfair behavior, the approach could win more favorable deals. The Bush administration did just that with steel tariffs in 2002, as did the Obama administration with a 35 percent tax on Chinese tires in 2009.
Trade experts are generally skeptical that these efforts prove worthwhile. Gary Clyde Hufbauer and Sean Lowry of the Peterson Institute for International Economics calculated that American consumers paid an extra $1.1 billion for tires in 2011 to safeguard a mere 1,200 American tire-making jobs. That’s $900,000 per job saved.
But Mr. Trump’s administration could bring a series of such cases, and if, as he promises, his team members prove to be made up of tougher, smarter negotiators than their predecessors, perhaps they could get better results. Even if they don’t, the $18 trillion United States economy will most likely be O.K.
Mr. Trump has said he will instruct his Treasury secretary to declare China a currency manipulator. The George W. Bush and Obama administrations didn’t do this, although they also thought that China artificially depressed the value of its currency to the benefit of Chinese exporters. However, they calculated that subtle diplomacy would be more likely than head-on confrontation to get results.
But who knows? Maybe that calculation was wrong, and a more confrontational approach would have led China to allow its currency to respond to market forces. The Chinese government has allowed its currency to rise relative to the dollar over the last few years, putting it roughly in line with economic fundamentals and reducing the urgency of the issue. (But it could still be in the United States’ interest to put in place agreements to make sure this remains the case.)
Naming China a currency manipulator merely triggers negotiation over what to do about it. Such negotiation would most likely be hard-fought, and it might result in a better long-term arrangement for the United States. Or not. But either way, it wouldn’t need to disrupt day-to-day trade relations.
That assumes that Mr. Trump takes a more aggressive stance using existing channels and authorities, and wages the battle with the trading partner over specific cases and industries. If so, it will keep lawyers and lobbyists for those industries busy.
“There would be pushback, but you’d be working within the relevant legal frameworks and using existing institutions as they were intended by Congress and the W.T.O. and our trading partners,” said Scott Lincicome, a trade lawyer at White & Case who has been critical of Mr. Trump. “Everybody will talk about it, but it won’t change the global macroeconomic outlook.”
Scenario 2: The bold use of authority, and serious blowback
Ambiguous language in the statutes grants the president broad authority over trade policy. Mr. Trump could be the kind of president willing to use that authority to its fullest.
Rather than focus on targeted duties on individual products as part of a W.T.O. case, the government could invoke emergency authority to place broad-based tariffs on goods from a given country. Think of the 45 percent tariff on Chinese imports that Mr. Trump at one point threatened during his campaign, or perhaps an escalating tariff set to rise until the trade deficit with a given country declines.
Moves along those lines would get everyone’s attention, but they would also create enormous ripple effects. There would surely be legal challenges by the targeted country’s industries, as well as swift and potentially painful retaliation from trade partners. China (or Mexico, or Japan) wouldn’t take these kinds of measures lying down.
“With these blunt instruments, there would be a lot of effects,” said Derek Scissors, a resident scholar at the American Enterprise Institute. “It would hit poor Americans the hardest in the sense that it’s a regressive tax that makes things like clothing and consumer electronics more expensive.”
And the retaliation would most likely be fierce. If China is the target, it might cancel orders for Boeing airliners and buy from Europe’s Airbus instead. (The United States exported $15 billion worth of aircraft to China last year). Or perhaps the Chinese would retaliate against American agriculture, endangering the $10.5 billion in United States soybean exports to China and endangering farms across the Midwest — prime Trump country, as the decision-makers in China will surely be aware.
And with the economic underpinnings of major industries under stress, the financial markets would probably enter a period of remarkable volatility. Expect plummeting stock prices for major United States companies that do business around the world.
The Trump administration would be risking significant damage to the United States economy if it took this route, without any guarantee of coming out with a more favorable long-term deal on the other side.
Scenario 3: Upending the world economic order
Trade wars that would be started by broad-based tariffs on major trading partners would be economically disruptive but would still leave the basic infrastructure of the global trade system in place.
The most extreme versions of a Trump trade policy, however, could wreak havoc on the entire system of global economic connections that the United States helped build since the end of World War II.
If the Trump administration can’t get the concessions it seeks in renegotiating Nafta, would he follow through on his threat to use the power, written into the trade agreement, to withdraw entirely with six months’ notice?
Or if the administration brings cases to the W.T.O. and loses, will the United States abide by the rulings, or will it follow Mr. Trump’s campaign threat to abandon an organization meant to bring order to the global trade system?
If he seeks to do those things using executive authority, will Congress stand by or seek to stop him?
“For the last 100 years or so, Congress and the executive branch have had a kind of gentleman’s agreement where Congress delegates its authority over international trade to the president as long as Congress gets the ultimate say,” Mr. Lincicome said. In a more extreme case of a Trump trade agenda, he said, “the risk is you have not just an economic crisis but a constitutional crisis.”
This is pretty far down the road of speculation. The various business interests who have the president-elect’s ear would surely try to persuade him not to risk everything by being so drastic. Financial markets since the election have appeared to reflect an expectation that the benign scenario for Trump trade policy will emerge. The S.&P. 500 index, the Dow Jones industrial average, the Nasdaq Composite index and the Russell 2000 index all hit new highs Monday.
The question of whether one of the more extreme, every-country-for-itself-trade-war scenarios emerges instead boils down to this: Does Mr. Trump mean some of the things he has said on the campaign trail about reopening the very basics of United States economic relationships, or was it all just words?
The economic consequences of the answer are huge.
Delta Air Lines has barred a disruptive passenger who shouted pro-Donald Trump and anti-Hillary Clinton remarks at fellow passengers on a flight from Atlanta to Allentown, Pa., last week, the airline’s chief executive said on Monday.
The chief executive, Edward H. Bastian, said in a memo published on Delta’s website that other travelers on the flight Nov. 22 would receive refunds for their tickets.
“This individual displayed behavior that was loud, rude and disrespectful to his fellow customers,” Mr. Bastian said in the statement. He added, “We must require civility on our planes and in our facilities.”
The decision by Delta came after the airline received criticism on social media for its initial response to the episode, which a passenger identified as Emma Baum videotaped and released online and to news organizations.
Ms. Baum was quoted by The Morning Call on Nov. 26 as saying that she had first noticed the man, who was not identified, shouting pro-Trump slogans in the terminal while waiting to board Flight 248. The man ended up sitting next to her, and she told him she had been out of the country and asked him about the election, she said.
Ms. Baum told The Morning Call that as the man became animated, jumping out of his seat, she began recording him with her cellphone. In the video, the man is seen clapping his hands and shouting at other passengers.
He says in part: “Donald Trump, baby! We got some Hillary bitches on here?”
The man also yelled: “Donald Trump! It’s your president. Every goddamn one of you. If you don’t like it, too bad.”
A Daily Beast writer was also provided with a copy of the video.
Ms. Baum said the man was briefly removed from the plane and then allowed back on the flight before it took off. She said she reported him to the authorities when the plane landed.
After the video was posted online, Delta Air Lines issued a statement on Nov. 26, apologizing to customers for the disruption and saying, “We have followed up with the teams involved and all agree that this customer should not have been allowed to continue on the flight.”
Mr. Bastian said in the statement on Monday: “After questioning the customer, our team members made the best decision they could given the information they had and allowed him to remain on the flight.”
He added, “If our colleagues had witnessed firsthand what was shown in the video, there is no question they would have removed him from the aircraft. He will never again be allowed on a Delta plane.”
The video was shared widely online, with many commentators noting that the man, who is white, was not ejected from the flight, but that passengers who are Muslim, Sikh, African-American and other races and ethnicities have been subjected to extra scrutiny or outright removal by various airlines while engaging in routine activities.
It was not immediately clear what, if any measures, were taken at the airport in Allentown when the man disembarked. Assistant Chief Gail Struss of the Allentown Police Department said in an email on Monday: “It’s possible we were called, but no report was taken by us that I can find. We would have referred the caller to the airport police.”
Officers at the Police Department at the A Lehigh-Northampton Airport Authority were not dispatched to respond to any passenger disturbance on Nov. 22, a spokesman, Colin Riccobon, said in an email.
